where does the end begin well for me it
all began with this little fellow this
adorable organism well I think it's
adorable is called Tetrahymena and it's
a single-celled creature and it's also
been known as pond scum so it's right my
career started with pond scum now it was
no surprise I became a scientist I
growing up far away from here as a
little girl I was deadly curious about
everything alive
I used to pick up lethally poisonous
stinging jellyfish and sing to them and
so starting my career I was deadly
curious about fundamental mysteries of
the most basic building blocks of life
and I was fortunate to live in a society
where that curiosity was valued now to
me this little pond scum critter
Tetrahymena was a great way to study the
fundamental mystery I was most curious
about those bundles of DNA in our cells
called chromosomes and that was because
I was curious about the very ends of
chromosomes known as telomeres now when
I started my quest all we knew was that
they help protect the ends of
chromosomes it was important when cells
divide it was really important but I
wanted to find out what telomeres
consisted of and for that I needed a lot
of them and so happens that cute little
Tetrahymena has a lot of short linear
chromosomes around 20,000 so lots of
telomeres and I discovered that
telomeres consisted of special segments
of non-coding DNA right at the very ends
of chromosomes but here's a problem now
we all start life as a single cell that
multiplies 2 to 2 becomes 4 4 becomes 8
and on and on to form the 200 million
billion cells that make up our adult
body
and some of those cells have to divide
thousands of times in fact even as I
stand here before you all throughout my
body cells are curiously replenishing to
will keep you standing here before you
so every time you still divide all of
its DNA has to be copied all of the
coding DNA inside of those chromosomes
because that carries the vital operating
instructions that keep our cells in good
working order so my heart cells can keep
a steady beat which I show you they're
not doing right now and and my immune
cells can fight off you know bacteria
and viruses and and our brain cells can
save the memory of our first kiss and
keep on learning throughout life but
there is a glitch in the way DNA is
copied it is just one of those facts of
life every time the cell divides and DNA
is copied some of that DNA from the ends
gets worn down and shortened some of
that telomere DNA and think about it
like the protective caps at the ends of
your shoelace there and there's keep the
shoelace or the chromosome from fraying
and when that tip gets too short it
falls off and that one down telomere
sends a signal to the cells the DNA is
no longer being protected sends a signal
time to die so end of story
well sorry not so fast
can't be the end of the story because
life hasn't died off the face of the
earth so I was curious if such wear and
tear is inevitable how on earth does
Mother Nature make sure we can keep our
chromosomes intact now remember that
little pumpkin critter to time that its
craziest thing was tetrahymena cells
never got old and died their telomeres
weren't shortening as time marched on
sometimes even got longer something else
was at work and believe me that
something was not an inny textbook so
working in my lab with my extraordinary
student Carol Greider and Carol and I
shared the Nobel Prize for this work we
began running experiments and we
discovered themselves do have something
else it was a previously undrained of
enzyme that could replenish make longer
telomeres and we named telomerase and
when we removed our Ponce comes to Lamba
raised their telomeres rammed down and
they died so it was thanks to their
plentiful telomerase that our pond scum
Cruden's never got old
okay that's incredibly hopeful message
for us humans to be receiving from pond
scum because it turns out that as we
humans age our telomeres do shorten and
in remarkably that shortening is aging
us generally speaking the longer your
telomeres the better off you are
it's the over shortening of telomeres
that leads us to see and feel and see
the signs of aging my skin cells start
to die and I start to see fine lines
wrinkles hair pigment cells die you
start to see gray immune system cells
die you increase your risks of getting
sick in fact the cumulative research
from the last twenty years has made
clear that telomere attrition is
contributing to our risks of getting
cardiovascular diseases Alzheimer's some
cancers diabetes the very conditions
many of this died off and so we have to
think about this what is going on this
attrition we look and we field older
yeah I tell them is losing the war of
attrition faster in those of us who feel
youthful longer turns out our telomeres
are staying longer for longer periods of
time extending our period feelings of
youthfulness and
using the risks of all we most dread as
the birthdays go by okay seems like a
no-brainer
now if my telomeres are connected to how
quickly I'm going to feel and get old if
my telomeres can be renewed by my
telomerase then all I have to do to
reverse the signs and symptoms of aging
is figure out where to buy that Costco
sized bottle of grade-a all organic
Fairtrade telomerase like great problem
solved
not so fast I'm sorry unless that's not
the case okay and why it's because human
genetics has taught us that when it
comes to our telomerase we humans live
on a knife edge okay simply put yes
nudging up telomerase does decrease the
risks of some diseases but it also
increases the risks of certain and
rather nasty cancers so even if you
could buy that Costco sized bottle of
telomerase and and there are many
websites with markups you know marketing
such dubious products problem is you
could nudge up your risks of cancers we
don't want that now don't worry
and because well I think it's kind of
funny that right now you know many of us
may be thinking that rather be like pond
scum right there is something for us
humans in the story of telomeres in
their maintenance but I want to get one
thing to you
it isn't about normally extending human
lifespan or or immortality it's about
health span now health span is the
number of years of your life when you're
free of disease you're healthy you're
productive you're just really enjoying
life does
spen the opposite of healthspan is the
time of your life spent feeling old and
sick and dying so the real question
becomes okay if I can't guzzle
telomerase do I have control over my
telomeres length and hence my well-being
my health without those downsides of
cancer risks okay so it's it's the year
2000 now I've been minutely scrutinizing
little teeny-tiny telomeres very happily
for many years when into my lab works a
psychologist named a disciple now
Lissa's expertise is in the effects of
severe chronic psychological stress on
our minds in our body's health and there
she was standing in my lab which which
ironically overlooked the entrance to a
mortuary and and and she had a
life-and-death question for me what
happens to telomeres in people who are
chronically stressed she asked me you
see she been studying caregivers and
specifically mothers of children with a
chronic condition be it gut disorder be
it autism you you name it a group
obviously under enormous and prolonged
psychological stress I have to say her
question changed me profoundly see all
this time I've been thinking of
telomeres as those minuscule molecular
structures that they are and the genes
that control telomeres and when ELISA
ask me about studying caregivers I
suddenly saw telomeres in a whole new
light I saw beyond the genes and the
chromosomes into the lives of the real
people we were studying and I'm a mom
myself and at that moment I was struck
by the image of these women dealing with
their child with a condition very
difficult to deal with often without
help
and such women simply often look worn
down so was it possible their telomeres
were worn down as well so how collective
curiosity went into overdrive and this
is selected for our first study a group
of such caregiving mothers and we wanted
to ask what's the length of their
telomeres compared with the number of
years that they have been caregiving for
their child with a chronic condition so
four years go by and the day comes when
all the results are in and Elissa looked
down at our first scatterplot and
literally gasped because there was a
pattern to the data and it was the exact
gradient that we most feared might exist
tombs right there on the page the longer
the more years that his mother had been
in this caregiving situation no matter
her age
the shorter were her telomeres and the
more she perceived her situation as
being more stressful the lower was her
telomerase and the shorter were her
telomeres so we had discovered something
unheard of the more chronic stress
you're under the shorter your telomeres
meaning the more likely you were to fall
victim to an early disease span and
perhaps untimely death our findings
meant the people's life events and the
way we respond to these events can
change how you maintain your telomeres
so telomere length wasn't just a matter
of age counted in years melissa's
question to me back when she first came
to my lab indeed had been a life from
death question now luckily hidden in
that data there was hope we noticed that
some others despite having been carried
from caring for their children for many
years had been able to maintain their
telomeres
so studying these women closely revealed
that they were resilient to stress
somehow they were able to experience
their circumstances not as a threat day
in and day out but as a challenge and
this has led to a very important insight
for all of us we have control over the
way we age all the way down into our
cells okay now our initial curiosity
became infectious thousands of
scientists from different fields added
their expertise to telomere research and
the findings have poured in it's up to
over 10,000 scientific papers and
Counting so several studies rapidly
confirmed our initial finding that yes
chronic stress is bad for telomeres and
now many are revealing that we have more
control over this particular aging
process the nearly of us could ever have
imagined a few examples a study from the
University of California Los Angeles of
people who are caring for a relative
with dementia long-term and looked at
their caregivers our telomere
maintenance capacity and found that it
was improved by them practicing a form
of meditation for as little as 12
minutes a day for two months
attitude matters if you're habitually a
negative thinker you typically see a
stressful situation with a threat stress
response meaning if your boss wants to
see you you automatically think I'm
about to be fired
and your blood vessels constrict and
your level of the stress hormone
cortisol creeps up and then it stays up
and over time that persistently high
level of the cortisol actually damped
down your telomerase not good for your
telomeres on the other hand if you
typically see something stressful as a
challenge to be tackled then blood flows
to your heart and to your brain and
you experienced a brief but energizing
spike of quarter-note cortisol and
thanks to that habitual bring it on
attitude your telomeres do just fine so
what does all of this telling us your
telomeres do just fine you really do
have power to change what is happening
to your own telomeres but our curiosity
just got more and more intense because
we started to wonder what about factors
outside our own skin could they impact
our telomere maintenance as well you
know we humans are intensely social
beings is it even possible that our
telomeres were social as well and the
results have been startling as early as
childhood emotional neglect exposure to
violence bullying and racism or impact
telomeres and the effects are long-term
can you imagine the impact on children
of living years in a war zone people who
can't trust their neighbors and who
don't feel safe in their naval
neighborhoods consistently have shorter
telomeres so your home address matters
for telomeres as well on the flip side
tight-knit communities being in a
marriage long term and lifelong
friendships even though all improved
healing mere maintenance so what is all
this telling us it's telling us that I
have the power to impact my own
telomeres and I also have the power to
impact yours telomeres science has told
us just how interconnected we all are
but I'm still curious I I do wonder what
legacy all of us
we'll leave for the next generation will
we invest in the next young woman or man
peering through a microscope at next
little critter the next bit of pond scum
curious about a question we don't even
know today is a question it could be a
great question that could impact all the
world and maybe maybe you're curious
about about you now that you know how to
protect your telomeres are you curious
what are you going to do with all those
decades of brimming good health and now
that you know you can impact the
telomeres of others are you curious how
will you make a difference and now that
you know the power of curiosity to
change the world how will you make sure
that the world invests in curiosity for
the sake of the generations that will
come after us thank you
[Applause]